I'm Brian Weatherley, UK jury member
for International Truck of the Year.
For the past 25 years, I've been road
testing heavy trucks, like this Volvo.
I think I'm a fairly good driver
in terms of fuel economy.
But I also know
that you can always be better.
That's why I've come to Volvo
at Warwick to meet Andy Collett:
Volvo Trucks' driver trainer.
There's no point going out
on the road trying to save fuel,
unless the truck is set up correctly
right at the very start.
Right tyre pressure, right cab gap,
the cab deflector set right,
and axle and trailer alignment spot on.
What's the first thing we'll do
when we get out on the road?
Your first run,
you'll just drive in position A,
and just do a normal drive
with no instruction.
We'll come back, take the readings.
I'll count the gear changes,
time taken and fuel used.
We'll then repeat the same route.
I'll instruct you the second time,
and we'll compare run 1 with run 2.
What's the route going to take in total?
The route's just over the hour. It's
a good run. It's a 60-kilometre run.
Hopefully, we'll show an improvement
between run 1 and run 2.
What do drivers say
when you show them the figures
and show the level of improvement?
Are they surprised?
You always get a little bit of:
'I've been driving for twenty years.
What are you going to teach me?'
Drivers soon realise that when they
come to Volvo for the driver training,
they're here to learn
and improve their skills.
Obviously,
you've done some fuel economy driving.
I'm pretty confident we have some new
stuff to show you that will improve you.
You're confident in route 2 I will be
a better, more fuel-efficient driver?
I'm very confident.
That's the end of round 1.
I don't think I did that badly.
Andy's looking at the fleet data.
He'll tell me just how well I did do.
So, Andy.
End of round 1, how did we do?
We did okay. There are some areas
where we can improve further.
Use of the cruise control. We'll use
the I-Roll function a little bit more.
Maybe a bit of manual intervention,
where we can maybe stop
some unnecessary gear changes,
and maybe just tickle it up
into the higher gear on the 40 mph area.
Sounds good.
Let's buckle up and get going.
We're going on a slight incline now.
What's my top tip from you
to start saving fuel,
climbing at about 50 mph?
The main thing is, don't use the resume
to accelerate back up to a preset speed.
Modulate your speed
by using the throttle pedal.
As we come up
towards the top of the hill,
we don't want to be powering
over the top. Back the throttle off.
The weight is now
pushing us along quite happily.
I'm still in 11th,
but you'd like me to be in 12th.
I'll go into manual and take it into
top gear. I'll roll along in top gear.
Again, we want to encourage
the vehicle to be in top gear.
We're coming into a traffic island here.
We can see from the road ahead
that there's quite a few cars about.
We want to be arriving
at the give way line with nothing there.
Back your brake off and give
yourself time. The island's clear.
Just blend in with the traffic. Superb.
We've kept the vehicle moving,
we've maintained a good speed.
So, look for that gap in the road ahead,
keep it rolling, and try not to stop?
That's right.
Andy, put me out of my misery.
Have I done better?
We were 7.43 percent
better on fuel on run 2.
We were 2.65 percent quicker
on the second run.
And we reduced the gear changes
by 17.4 percent.
What would that 7.4 percent
improvement actually mean?
If I was, say, a fleet operator
running ten trucks,
each truck doing 100,000 miles a year,
what would it mean to my bottom line?
An operator running on 100,000 miles
with ten trucks,
fuelled at about 6 pounds a gallon...
Based on that 7.43 percent, would save
the operator 67,500 pounds in fuel.
That's about 76,000 euros
at the moment.
I think any operator would be delighted
to have that in their bottom line.
Andy, thanks very much for all
your help. Thank you, teacher.